Now I will humbly request Hazrat Qibla Pir Suleman Muhammad Shabir Shah Sahib Gilani to quench the thirst of our hearts and enlighten us about the life of Hazrat Baba Ji Sahib, to illuminate our hearts and minds.
Naray Takbeer! Naray Risalat! Naray Takbeer! Naray Risalat! Chura Sharif - we praise and send blessings upon the beloved Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, the generous Messenger. I seek refuge in Allah from the accursed Satan. In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. First of all, I...
...this dignified and simple gathering for the interview, question and answer session, has been organized by the website Chura Sharif. And may Allah keep this initiative going, may it continue. The personality about whom this interview is being conducted today, the questions and answers being exchanged...
...may it continue long. The status, the greatness, the dignity of that personality - I can only say this much: their greatness and dignity is such that by speaking of it, we must illuminate our hearts and minds. Since I have already mentioned that Darbar Aliya Chura Sharif is the center, the capital of the Naqshbandi Mujaddidi silsila, from which thousands and millions of people have benefited...
...by speaking of it, we must illuminate our hearts and minds. Since I have already mentioned that Darbar Aliya Chura Sharif is the center, the capital of the Naqshbandi Mujaddidi silsila, from which thousands and millions of people have benefited, are benefiting, and will continue to benefit.
...have been benefiting, are benefiting, will continue to benefit. Today, anyone who has even a slight connection with Tasawwuf, or carries love for the Sufis in their heart, whoever has any connection to any silsila, whoever is a servant of any elder, whoever beholds any Sufi saint...
...I say with great conviction that when Chura Sharif is mentioned, when its discussion begins, there cannot be any scholar, any Sufi, anyone connected to Tasawwuf who is not aware of Chura Sharif. More than a century has passed...
...since Chura Sharif was established. Our forefathers benefited millions of people. This is not just a matter of writing or speaking - look, at that time from Afghanistan to all four corners of the world, especially to Hindustan, to Iran...
...to Syria and Turkey - this chain of spiritual benefit was spread by Baba Ji Sahib or by their servants and disciples. But the situation was such - I will briefly mention - that at that time...
...there was no confrontation with the government. But the traditions of our ancestors were kept alive. The choice was: either accept the government's authority or become a migrant. They did not accept the government's authority. At that time, the government was non-Muslim. They did not submit.
...while thousands of people of that era accepted the authority and today their descendants number in thousands and millions. But Baba Ji, the founder of Chura Sharif, declared: "I am a beggar at the door of Mustafa. There is no greater inheritance for me than this. And if there is any inheritance, it is this torn mat of mine."
"This is a patched blanket to keep the shoulders warm, and this is an old water pot. No one can take this from me. But I will speak what is pleasing to Allah and His Messenger." Now the situation was also that since there was no era of media, no written documentation...
But when the written tradition began, it was still not enough for people to quench their thirst. And this is a sad truth that must be acknowledged - those whose rights were not properly given, they continued their work in their own way. But Alhamdulillah...
...that Baba Ji Sarkar's blessed name - Hazoor Baba Ji Pir Syed Noor Muhammad Gilani, may Allah's mercy be upon him - was illuminated then, is illuminated now, and will remain illuminated until the Day of Judgment. Hazoor Qibla Baba Ji Pir Haidar Shah, the one with the black shawl, Sarkar - you are asking about that personality who was a living...
...example of his ancestors, understand him as the image of the pure ones, understand him as a treasury of Mustafa's wealth. From whose lips always flowed either Quranic wisdom or lessons from the life of Mustafa Kareem. I will elaborate further.
Since it was not the era of media, this was a looted and plundered caravan that departed from Baghdad, stopped at various places, reached Bukhara, and from there this looted caravan, speaking the truth at every stop, reached the Kohat-Mianwali area, Teerah. What happened there, from there this caravan moved on...
...to Tirah Shimali and Waziristan, to Akhun Khel. From there this caravan, which consisted of three or two members, moved on. One brother stayed in Tirah Sharif. The younger brother went to a place called Dar Samand near Bannu Road. Dar Samand - this is a missionary term...
They settled in Dar Samand, and their descendants exist there today - the Sadaat-e-Gilan of Dar Samand, who are our cousins. One person - this caravan of four people arrived in 1867 or 1868, in sixty-eight, and established the dera at Chura Sharif.
Great hardships, great difficulties and trials. But they never abandoned the truth. They did not care for worldly wealth. Hundreds of acres of land, large estates were sent as bribes - just say one word, accept the authority of the time. This was when the current district of Attock - district Attock didn't exist then - the district at that time was Shahpur Sadr...
But they said no, these estates and lands mean nothing to me compared to the status of one morsel from the door of Mustafa. As Hazrat said: "On your morsels grows the kick of the stranger." This brings us to Hazoor Qibla Baba Ji Pir Haidar Shah, the blessed one. What we have heard, since there was no written record...
Your birth was in Tirah Sharif. You were born there, you carried on the silsila there. But you are travelers of the second caravan. The first caravan that settled Chura Sharif - you are not from that caravan.
You are from the second or third caravan, whose culmination brought you to the court of Chura Sharif. So this was your lineage. This was your birth. Now, by Allah's knowledge and what we have heard or read - who suggested your name? Who bestowed your first feeding?
I heard from the elders that your blessed birth was in Tirah Sharif. Your name was suggested by your grandfather, Hazrat Baba Ji...
Syed Faqeer Muhammad, may Allah's mercy be upon him, suggested the name. And your first feeding was also given by Hazrat with his own hands.
He raised his hands and prayed: "My Lord, this grandson You have given me as a prince - my Lord, I have named him Haidar Shah, in connection with Mawla Murtaza...
...Haidar-e-Karrar. My Lord, preserve the honor of this name I have given, and preserve the honor of my first feeding, and make him the bearer of those qualities that belonged to Sarkar Mawla Ali and Haidar-e-Karrar." This was the tradition of the first feeding. And regarding the childhood - you had brothers...
I heard from them - just one or two things I heard: The first thing was that from childhood, as is the way of Sufis, from childhood there was great piety, there was a tradition of taqwa. Playing and frolicking that children do...
...staying away from that. And I also heard that your peers, your contemporaries, even in childhood you would tell them: "Brother, we have not come into this world for play. We should not waste our precious time in play. We have come to do some work in this world, and we must do it."
So those who were your age, I heard, would ask: "What work is there, brother? Tell us." You would say: "The greatest work is to spread the word of truth to the common people. And the teachings of my father..."
"...I must spread them." These were the childhood circumstances. What else was there, how it was - only Allah knows best. These two things I heard, I have shared. Now about your early education - where did you receive it and who were your teachers?
Some time ago, in our elders' homes, this tradition existed that early education was given at home. It was given at home because that era was such...
...that the pearls of knowledge distributed at home were very precious. For early education, Baba Ji Sarkar learned from his father and from his uncle Hazoor...
...who was the great scholar of his time, an unparalleled authority. His blessed name was Hazrat Baba Ji Muhammad Syed Muhammad Gul Nabi Shah, may Allah's mercy be upon him - your paternal uncle. They were running the educational institution at that time. And then your grandfather, Hazrat Baba Ji Syed Faqeer Muhammad, may Allah's mercy be upon him...
...their elder brother, the senior - from Afghanistan to Hindustan, he was known as Mullah Ji. Because only in Pakistan and Hindustan, perhaps in Bangladesh, in East Pakistan - the word Mufti is used...
But in Afghanistan and other matters, the word Mullah was used. Mullah meant one of piety, one of knowledge, one who has memorized enough to give fatwas. And your great-grandfather's blessed name was Hazrat Baba Ji Syed Deen Muhammad Shah, may Allah's mercy be upon him, also known as Hazrat Mullah Ji.
The world called him Mullah Ji Sahib. From him too, some knowledge was gained, since he had established a proper educational institution at Chura Sharif, where he would teach his own children and family members. This was the tradition of teaching at that time. In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. Now this question arises: Hazrat Baba Ji Pir Haidar Shah Sahib - with his name comes "Badshah" (King), and "Kali Chadar Wala" (the one with the black shawl)...
I heard that your elders at some gathering - your grandfather Hazoor, your uncle Hazoor - mentioned something about the black shawl... about the noble Prophet's, the blessed Prophet's, black shawl, black blanket...
...it penetrated so deeply into the heart, that from childhood to youth and beyond, he took black cloth, had a shawl made from it, and instead of wearing it draped, he would place it on his shoulders according to the Sunnah...
And when someone asked about this black shawl, Sarkar said: "My Master used the black blanket, so I say this is my Master's Sunnah." And it became such a part of his life, that black shawl...
...that he became famous. At Chura Sharif, among your brothers and elders, he became known as "Haidar Shah, the one with the black shawl, Sarkar." And to this day at Chura Sharif, when they say "the one with the black shawl, Sarkar"...
...it is understood by all in our family, all the young men, my brothers and elders - they understand that "the one with the black shawl, Sarkar" refers to Hazrat Baba Ji Pir Haidar Shah Sahib, may Allah's mercy be upon him. This was the story of the black shawl. Alhamdulillah. Now this term "Badshah" - there are two meanings. One is metaphorical - when someone is carefree and independent, they are called Badshah. And when someone has...
...royal qualities, he is called Badshah. Now the state of independence and the state of absorption, the nearness to the Divine and nearness to the Prophet was such that whoever came - great or small - sat down, left, said salaam, asked about wellbeing, and that was it.
Beyond that, the royal lifestyle was such that throughout his life he wore the finest clothes - he used the tahband (lower garment), he used the kurta, he used the waistcoat, he used a beautiful walking stick...
So this connection came from his family - your elders would say that this son of ours is a Badshah, a king. So in this context, this title was given - understand it as a title or a designation - that Haidar Shah Badshah would wear royal attire. But in the world of Tasawwuf, among his contemporaries...
Among his contemporaries I don't know, but I will certainly quote from the land of Kasur. Many people in England have witnessed this. In Kasur, there was a saint from the Chishti silsila, Hazrat Baba Ji Pir Syed Naqeeb Ullah Shah Sahib, may Allah's mercy be upon him. A reliable companion told me that in their gathering, discussion arose...
In the blessed gathering of Hazrat Baba Ji Syed Naqeeb Ullah Shah Sahib - they were a great Sufi, a great scholar. They were not ordinary, they were great scholars, and at that time a pir was recognized only when they were great scholars. They were among those. They were great Sufis as well. When the discussion arose in their gathering from different angles, they took notice and asked whose discussion is this?
A servant said it's about Chura Sharif. In a state of spiritual ecstasy, as the companions who were present relate, in a remarkable ecstatic state, you said: "The one you are discussing - Pir Haidar Shah Sahib - he was the Badshah of Tariqat." So he was the Badshah of Tariqat - this is no ordinary statement.
So this also happened - that his contemporaries and even those after them, the people of Tasawwuf, the people of spiritual insight, they acknowledged this. Look, he was the Badshah of Tariqat. In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. There is a tradition in our family, and it exists in many families, that the bay'ah (spiritual allegiance) happens within the family. Now whose hands does the bay'ah happen on? The person of authority decides.
Like these sons of mine - their bay'ah is on the hands of their paternal grandfather's younger brother, Hazrat Baba Ji Pir Muhammad Ali Shah Sarkar. Both, or all three - the youngest wasn't there yet - but Usman Shah and Fazl Usman Shah or Fazl Noman Shah's bay'ah was on their hands. This tradition continues to this day...
...that bay'ah happens, has been happening. For example, my nephews, may Allah grant them safety - both or all three nephews, their bay'ah is on the hands of Hazrat Baba Ji Sarkar Sirhindi Sarkar, probably Sayyid Muhammad Masoom Sirhindi Madani, in Madinah Munawwarah. Both of their bay'ah is on his hands. Similarly, we have other family members...
...whose bay'ah is within the family. But Alhamdulillah, this Mujaddidi and Naqshbandi lineage - from what I've heard, some young people had an inclination toward Hazrat Sarkar Baba Ji Muhammad Fazan Usman Jan Sirhindi's direct discipleship. Similarly, Hazrat Baba Ji...
Sarkar Syed Haidar Shah Badshah, the one with the black shawl, Sarkar - his bay'ah was on his grandfather's hands. The one the world knows in Tasawwuf as Hazrat Baba Ji Syed Faqeer Muhammad, may Allah's mercy be upon him. He had two khilafats (spiritual successions)...
One khilafat he received from his grandfather, and the second khilafat was from his father, Hazrat Baba Ji Syed Gul Nabi, also known as Zarif Hawali Sarkar. He would say with great love: "I have served two kings, and from two emperors I have received this chain of spiritual succession." Now there is a beautiful question - the bay'ah happened in '64...
I was studying at Dar ul Uloom Jamia Naeemia at that time. But from Chura Sharif - at that time you would stay at Dhok Matheen Sharif, and I would come to serve you whenever I was free - before going to Lahore and even during...
...my educational period. By my good fortune, Sarkar asked me: "What do you do, where are you?" I said: "Sarkar, I'm in Lahore." "What do you do?" I said: "I study." "Where do you study, what do you study?" I said: "Dar ul Uloom Jamia Naeemia." You said: "I know Mufti Muhammad Hussain Naeemi Sahib." I said: "Yes, he is among our teachers, he teaches, and there are other teachers as well."
After a pause, you told me: "Sometimes make time to go to Sarkar Data Ganj Bakhsh's blessed presence. Don't be proud about sitting at the headside, sit at the feet. And from there, after some time, also go visit Lahori Qalandar, Allama Iqbal. He will also give you something." This was a spiritual instruction.
So I started going. It's a tradition in Lahore that on Thursdays we definitely go to Data Sahib. And sometimes to Allama Iqbal, may Allah's mercy be upon him, Lahori Qalandar - Qalandar, this term Baba Ji Pir Haidar Shah first used, may Allah's mercy be upon him. He was the first to call him Qalandar, no one said it before. So I would go there. Now let me tell you something interesting - two karamats (miracles) of Allama Iqbal I will mention...
...that I personally witnessed - this is not something I heard. The first was in '65 or '66, I was traveling by bus, and I was on the bus. In Gujrat, there is a beautiful town called Lala Musa, where there's a junction...
When we arrived there, it was about thirty degrees, summer season, and a thought came to my mind - I have such love and devotion for Allama Iqbal, may Allah's mercy be upon him, but I have never visited him (his grave). Just as I thought this, I dozed off, and in that doze I saw that Allama Sahib is standing next to me in the bus.
You put your hand on my shoulder. At that time I used to carry a notebook - there was also a tradition of note-taking - whatever was heard, you would write it down. In this notebook were also some couplets I had heard in gatherings, some written in couplet form. So Allama...
Now, what did he make me write? He instructed me: "Write: This lesson is a provision for me from Lahori Qalandar - Being a beggar of Mustafa is the most complete lesson in the world." He made me note this down, I noted it. And when I opened my eyes from that drowsy state, it was written there, but Hazrat was not there. After that, the elder's instruction was...
..."Brother, go visit Allama Iqbal's place, he will give you something from there." Then once I complained: "I can't find two or three poems of yours with 'Ruhani' takhallus (pen name)." Then in a dream state...
Hazrat Allama Lahori Qalandar told me: "I have written a naat (poem in praise of the Prophet) that has not been published, but it lies in my books. The first couplet of that naat is: 'The glance of Ashqi gives provision, lifting the veil of secrets, though he sits hidden in seclusion, like a flickering lamp.'" Now when the matter of visiting came...
I would often go to Hazrat's service there. From there, besides book learning, there was much practical learning. What was the practical learning? Like that verse of Aazam Lahori: "He sits on a mat, yet his throne is the heavens." From there, practical lessons were received. What was the practical lesson? That despite having everything, one must maintain humility.
Keep oneself humble, don't show off. Practically, this was received there. And as far as spiritual connection is concerned, Alhamdulillah, whatever there is, it is the blessing of Sarkar's gaze. The beautiful moments - every single moment was beautiful. But in my childhood, these are the beautiful moments...
Straw mats are spread, and the King of Chura Sharif is seated. Hazoor Baba Ji arrived in splendor, my respected father arrived, my esteemed uncle arrived, grandfather's younger brother Hazoor Qibla Pir Mahboob Shah Sahib arrived, and your paternal cousin grandfather...
...who was a very great scholar of his time. A very great scholar. His blessed name was Hazoor Qibla Baba Ji Pir Syed Maulana Syed Musa Sahib, may Allah's mercy be upon him. They were paternal cousins. They are seated. And then others, among them your other paternal cousin, Hazrat Baba Ji Pir Syed Muhammad Shafi, may Allah's mercy be upon him, and they were engaged in discussion.
The discussion was about a tap installed in the mosque - what is the ruling on drinking water from it? A lively discussion was happening, with forceful questions and answers. And in these questions and answers, Baba Ji said - you said: "My elders" - you didn't say which ones - they said: "If that tap is endowed for the mosque...
...then its water will not be permissible for the general public, it will be for the worshippers. If it's for general use, then common people can take water from it. Now this tap installed in the mosque - it was installed for the mosque. Move it slightly onto the wall outside. It's the mosque's tap, not the mosque's property.
It was Sarkar's tap, take it outside so people can also drink." These were beautiful moments. Beautiful moments with brothers - during childhood, these intense matters were being discussed in this way. Similarly, let me give another example here - this custom of cooking food after death that common people in Pakistan have, what we call charity food in our customs, in Kashmir...
...I don't remember exactly, but I remember this much - someone asked whether it's permissible or not. So smilingly, Baba Ji said to Maulvi Sahib - with warmth and familiarity...
So those were beautiful moments. Very beautiful moments - they are still before my eyes today. Sometimes traveling on horseback, a caravan of servants alongside. Sometimes talk of Madinah the Pure is happening. Tears of longing are flowing. And what is the naat-reciter reciting? At that time, what was recited was: "Your face's days, O beloved..."
"...Dale Suniya, Sard Hamama, Kamli Wale" - this was one naat. And another naat I remember two or three lines of - what a beautiful moment it was, what a magnificent gathering - there were naat-reciters, there were elders. I was a small child then, I remember...
The naat that was being recited was: "Every moment my eyes remain fixed on the one with the black blanket, Sarkar. My eyes keep looking again and again at the path of the Arab camel-rider." This naat was being recited, so those were beautiful moments. But since I was a child - in '64 you passed away. These two or three things from my memory are preserved.
Now regarding Pakistan's creation - this is a long political topic. But I will summarize: When the time came to create Pakistan, in Hindustan - if I say a hundred percent, it would still be correct - ninety-nine percent of the shrines joined together, determined that Pakistan must be created. The slogan was: "We will create Pakistan!"
The rallying cry was: "We will take Pakistan!" In this context, Hazrat's residence was in Lahore, Wassanpura Chopira Wala. Maulana Muhammad Bakhsh Muslim, may Allah's mercy be upon him, was Hazrat Baba Ji Muhammad Ali Jinnah Quaid-e-Azam's special advisor. So Quaid-e-Azam Sahib said: "Brother, the matter is this - Maulana Muslim Sahib's word is not being heard."
"Now what should we do?" So Muslim Sahib said: "The situation is that there is a saintly elder whose contribution to politics is significant. The world knows him as Pir Jamaat Ali Shah. If he joins our cause, it would be a great thing." When you went to them - now if anyone wants to dispute this, that's their choice, but what Maulana Muslim Sahib himself told me, they said: "I am bound by my spiritual master's command..."
"Wherever he directs me, I will go. I don't know what Quaid-e-Azam is, who he is, but yes, Pakistan should be created." Maulana Muslim Sahib took Muhammad Ali Jinnah with him to Wassanpura to Baba Ji's presence, and came with the message. Baba Ji said: "Come back tomorrow for the answer." The next day, you summoned Ameer-e-Millat, Hazrat Hafiz Ji, may Allah's mercy be upon him.
He presented himself to you. You told him: "Jamaat Ali Shah, I am giving you this command - start a vigorous movement and go out with the flag of Pakistan. Allah will grant you success." Hazrat Ameer-e-Millat said: "Hazrat, if Pakistan is created, I will go out. If it's not created, then what?"
So Sarkar said: "Jamaat Ali Shah, as far as Sarkar (the Prophet) is concerned, it has been approved. This Muslim country will definitely be created, and the credit for creating it will go to the Muslims." Pir Jamaat Ali Shah Sahib... Then he used to tell me in Punjabi: "My heart, my liver was so filled - I started crying. What a blessing - I will earn Pakistan and this Pakistan..."
And then after that, the fatwa that was issued - the truth must be spoken, one should not diminish one's own stature - this fatwa that was issued from Kichaucha Sharif, the current Hazrat Hasan Shah Sahib, may Allah's mercy be upon him, Kichauchvi, from Mahra, from Kichaucha. The fatwa stated: "Any Muslim who does not vote for Muslim League - it will become impermissible to bury him in a Muslim graveyard." This was a powerful, powerful fatwa, a strong fatwa.
And the endorsement of this fatwa was given by Hazrat Baba Ji Pir Haidar Shah - that yes, this fatwa from Kichaucha Sharif is absolutely correct - taking it in hand...
All those institutions that bear his name - Jamia Haideria - you also have Jamia Haideria, and Alhamdulillah it's at Chura Sharif as well, in Lahore as well, in Rawalpindi as well. There's an institution running near Fouj Colony, the Jamia Haideria Jadeedah...
...is running. Similarly, locally at Matheen Sharif also Jamia Haideria is running, in Lahore it's running, then at Hanjal Verial Road it's running, near Jago Jahanabad it's also running. Many institutions bear Baba Ji's name because whatever we receive is through the blessing and charity of your name. And it's our duty - wherever we establish an institution, it should be in Hazrat's name.
As for patronage - in Lahore, since you spent a significant portion of your life there, you greatly patronized Hizb-ul-Ahnaf, patronized Jamia Numania. And regarding mosques - you constructed many mosques...
You left an imam there and established a regular stipend for him, saying your duty is twofold: you must increase the congregation and teach Quran to children. You must teach Quran, you must teach Hadith Sharif. And after that, if any madrasa...
...in those days would come to you, you wouldn't send them away empty-handed. You would grant something, patronize them. We have many documented proofs of where all you provided patronage. In Makka Mukarrama as well, there was an institution - I don't remember its name, Jamiatul Salafiyyah - though it wasn't as it is today - there too...
We have the correspondence showing that you patronized there as well. And at that time, in Madinah Tayyibah there was a madrasa that you patronized and would send your share there. And then Jamia Mujaddidiyya Sirhind Sharif, the madrasa established at Hazrat Mujaddid's blessed shrine - at that time you also patronized it and would send annual contributions there. And you would say with great pride: "That brother...
Why shouldn't I spend money on Mujaddid Pak's service? It's being spent." But you cannot imagine the state of adherence to Shariah! The state of Shariah adherence was such that even in gatherings, no one could do anything wrong. I remember that a scholar came, I won't mention his name, who had wound a turban on a cap...
And its tassel was very large. You called him close, seated him with affection, and said: "Maulana, I have read that having a small tassel here is considered permissible according to some views. But keeping such a large one enters the realm of extravagance." Similarly, Shariah adherence was such that even a young girl could recite the call to prayer...
And there was restriction on that too - that there is a standard. Similarly, I saw that when you would wear your blessed attire, you would have it tailored properly, and if someone made a mistake, you would correct them: "This is not right, this shouldn't be done this way." Even in eating matters, there was such discipline - "Everyone must sit together to eat," and you would say: "Make rows, sit with Bismillah, and pass to each other..."
And there are many matters where I could list numerous teachings for you. Firm but not harsh. There was no harshness - it was a way of explaining, not harsh, not strict. You would explain beautifully. Our relatives from Kotli, Azad Kashmir - two elders came for a visit. Why did they come? Their names I will tell you. One elder's name was Maulana Muhammad Bakir Ali Khan...
Their descendants are in Bolton, England. And the other one who came was Hakeem Bilayat Khan. Their descendants are in Bolton too. Hakeem Bilayat Khan, they would serve medicine, and Maulana Bakir Sahib was a religious scholar, he had a beard. So Baba Ji Sarkar asked: "Maulvi Bakir Khan, you have a beard, this one has a beard - he's Bilayat Khan - why don't you have a beard?"
"Show him your example and then he'll also..." - not scolded, but indicated with love and wisdom.
In Baba Ji's gathering, his duty was to give Hadith lessons. Hazoor would also listen attentively, would listen to two lessons, and when the lesson ended, Hazrat would provide the explanation himself. And he wouldn't say "this is wrong." He would say: "This point was also missed by Maulana Sahib, as happens in such chains, things get left out - if it comes to my mind, let me complete it for him." This was the manner of teaching.
Love of the Prophet - Alhamdulillah, it has been filled to the brim in my noble family. SubhanAllah!
Now look - in Pakistan there have been very great scholars. One of them was Maulana Abdul Ghafoor Hazarvi, may Allah's mercy be upon him, the Lover of Quran. He had come to visit, had come to pay respects. Looking here and there, looking around, he addressed Zahuri Sahib...
And with him was Maulana Muhammad Sahar Gulfroosh - addressing these people, he said: "Brothers, Zahuri, listen - here at Chura Sharif, one must proceed very carefully. Here is the fragrance of Mustafa's love, the Mustafa's fragrance is wafting. This is the headquarters, and these people who have come out, they have come out as offshoots from this place..."
And I still remember that scene too - when the anniversary at Chura Sharif was being celebrated. Hazoor Qibla, Zia-e-Ummat, Pir Muhammad Karam Shah Al-Azhari Sahib, with great affection for Mustafa, was present. And the scene was such that all the descendants were swaying in ecstasy and tears were streaming from their eyes. When they stood for the salutation...
When this line of the salaam was recited: "Those whose prostration the prayer niche has adopted..." - no one, as I saw, everyone was in such a state that Pir Karam Shah Azhari also fell into prostration...
All the descendants also fell into prostration, and all the attendees fell into prostration. And the one reciting the salaam recited this verse approximately eighteen times. And when he stopped, he said: "For God's sake, please raise your heads - I don't understand what I should do." This love of the Prophet is a wealth. It is widespread. Even today I say to you with great pride...
I proclaim that whoever wants can catch hold of any descendant, seat him, ask him any question, and see what he says. And even today, our general state is such that when the young men sit together - I am usually among them - when we sit together, I often say to the descendants: "Should I recite a naat to you?" Among them is one descendant named Syed Deen...
Very good voice, very melodious. And Hazrat Maulana Allama Sahib Zia Muhammad, may his shadow extend, he is also a very great scholar, a Qazi, and their style of reciting is very beautiful. Similarly, among the young descendants there are many...
Sitting like disciplined students - these are the ones who are spreading throughout the country. Now this is a recent story - we were sitting in the mosque, and he said to me: "Uncle, you're sitting quietly." I said: "My mood isn't right." He said: "Should we create some atmosphere for you?"
And what atmosphere did they create? Three of them sat together and started reciting a naat. And what naat did they recite? It was inside the mosque, Baba Ji was there, they sat inside the mosque. The naat was: "Your river of mercy is flowing openly. I have received my charity, my work is progressing. Your name is on the Throne, your name is everywhere." And when they reached the final verse...
"As for me - whatever I have is the charity of Mustafa. His portion grows on my lips." All the descendants who were seated - what a scene it was, with tears flowing. Alhamdulillah, the treasure of Mustafa's wealth was being distributed at that time as well...
It is being distributed even more today, and every young person, Alhamdulillah, you will see - they will mature. And in their heart and mind, the love for Mustafa and especially today, great people aside, descendants aside - but I say with pride that my Baba Ji's descendants, Alhamdulillah, on the matter of belief, they are so firm and so staunch that no one can shake them, no one can move them.
In the month of Ramadan, go to Madinah Munawwarah, and you'll see Chura Sharif's young men are representing there. Many have gone. Go to any country, Chura Sharif representation is there. All the young men, Masha'Allah, my Baba Ji's light of the eye, my Baba Ji's blessed offspring, the entire world - each one better than the other - is spreading this treasure of love.
Since at that time ships were used, what they called steamers - multiple visits to the blessed court. Because at that time there were no planes, it took three to four months just to reach for Hajj. There were many visits to Hajj. I don't have the exact count, but I know there were many visits, Alhamdulillah, by Baba Ji Sahib to Madinah Tayyibah. This is a very interesting question.
The elders of that time, his contemporaries - after this chain, each would give the lesson of their own spiritual path. I will specifically mention Golra Sharif. This is not - today generally there's a sad situation - that in hearts there's a strange kind of envy, let's say...
We have received this excellent teaching that whoever is miserly can never become wealthy. He who is miserly can never become a Sufi. So with great conviction - Alhamdulillah, we mention the Sufis, we strengthen our faith - like the court of Golra Sharif, the esteemed Aqeelat Barakhan...
And on the pulpit there, those who go there, two books used to lie - Mohyiddin Ibn Arabi's Fusus al-Hikam, and Masnavi Sharif of Hazrat Baba Ji Pir Mahr Ali Shah, may his blessings continue - lessons would be given from it.
In our family too, and especially Baba Ji Sahib - regularly at night, quoting from Maktubat Sharif, giving reference to Mujaddid Pak's Maktubat, Sarkar used to say: "This is my share, this is what would happen - my Imam Rabbani said this, my Imam Rabbani said this." This tradition continued.
After every Maghrib prayer, this program would continue - but the phrase would be: "My Imam Rabbani said this." And you would often say: "Read Maktubat Sharif, embrace it, and gain some benefit from it." As for physical description - then I'll describe to you what he was like... just understand: moon-like face, silver-white...
...fair complexion, and on the head a white turban, on the shoulders a black shawl, locks hanging down. And as Riaz-ud-Din Sahib has a line in a naat - not that I'm attributing it to them - their couplet is: "Those who wrap their tresses, page after page..."
"...a glance of prophetic splendor, locks swaying, graceful upon the shoulders." This verse too can be applied. Riaz-ud-Din Sawordi Sahib gave me this verse in Madinah Pak, about 25 years ago. So I remember that the blessed beard was white and immaculate, Masha'Allah, glowing, pure white color...
A shawl on the shoulder - then a light-colored skull cap, slightly off-white, he would sometimes wear a pocket vest with a chain, and the chain would be in his pocket with a watch. In his blessed hand a walking stick - the walking stick would reach up to here, up to the waist. And even his manner of walking was such - neither fast nor slow - with measured pace he would walk, and while walking he wouldn't talk...
When walking, just silent. He wouldn't talk while standing. When leaving the house, walking, then walk. This was his manner. And what more can I tell you about what he was like, how he was - like the flower forgot the garden... Just those who have seen can tell. Hazoor Qibla Baba Ji, Alhamdulillah - those who were born from the same mother - the elder was Pir Haidar Shah Sahib, the younger was Pir...
But during this time, your mother passed away. And Hazoor Qibla Baba Ji, the one with the black shawl, Sarkar made a second marriage from Muzaffarabad. That Mai Sabiha - from her came one son. That Mai Sabiha also passed away. Even before - my father Mian Ghulam Rasool Sahib also married into that family from Muzaffarabad...
So the place is called Barmala. What is the place called? Barmala. We have cousins there - our family from Muzaffarabad, they are our cousins. We have marriages with them - those from Muzaffarabad, or those from Gari Dopatta, or those from Baghla Saidaan - so those who were stepbrothers, their blessed name was Baba Ji Pir Sarwar Shah, may Allah's mercy be upon him.
Meaning in terms of age, they were younger, the youngest in fact. But still, they were also revered descendants. We have seen them, and it was never apparent - meaning, there was such a bond that no one would ever notice - their faces showed they were brothers. Sitting together, no one could tell that their mothers were different. But very few people knew this. They too, Masha'Allah, were beautiful, handsome, and of good character.
What was Sarkar's blessed age when you passed away? You yourself said somewhere that you were around 125 years old. But the amazing thing is - till death, no glasses were worn. No glasses. And never said "what, what did you say, I can't hear." And the bedding was such - a small wooden cot...
A small door, an old table from the old times would be there, and on it Hadith books would be lying. The Mishkat Sharif would be lying, sometimes other books would be lying...
Continuing with devotional practices and daily routine...
First was Hazrat Baba Ji Pir Roshan Shah Sahib, Roshan Deen Ji Sahib - your uncle. He passed away - a very handsome young man, passed away in his youth. Now our tradition here is that women's graves are separate, men's graves are separate. Pir Roshan Shah Sahib's grave is there...
And that grave - after that Pir Sarwar Shah Sahib Baba Ji - their blessed grave is at the shrine at Barmala Sharif. After that, when Dada Ji Sahib passed away within a year, Baba Ji Zarif Ali Sarkar - their grave was made next to theirs. About a year later, Pir Mahboob Shah Sahib also passed away, next to them - then their burial took place. This is all, nothing special about it - just that wherever the space was in the shrine, that's where it is. SubhanAllah.